Hello! This is "JavaScript and the farmer emoji", a presentation I gave yesterday, August 22nd, 2023.
This is a recorded version that I'm doing later.
Hopefully it can be useful to you.
So my name is Evan Hahn.
I'm a computer programmer here in Chicago.
You can find the slides, a text version of this talk, my contact information and some
other stuff at evanhahn.com/chicagojs2023.
So we've probably all worked with strings before in JavaScript.
I certainly have.
I've often wanted to know the length of a string.
This is the string "hi".
What is its length?
2.
Here is the farmer emoji.
Think for a moment about what its length probably should be.
If you're like me, you think that the answer should be 1.
When I gave this presentation yesterday, I heard people say 2 and 5 and 3, but
the answer is none of those.
It is 7.
What the heck is going on here?
This is really confusing.
Uh, whaa??
Yeah, this doesn't make any sense.
The real question I'm asking is what does length do?
Because it doesn't do what I think it does.
If it did what I thought it does, it would return 1, but it returns 7.
Why is that?
To answer this question, we're going to take a look at three terms from the Unicode glossary.
And the first is the extended grapheme cluster.
An extended grapheme cluster is "the text between extended grapheme cluster boundaries as specified
by Unicode Standard Annex #29, 'Unicode Text Segmentation', abbreviated as EGC."
This doesn't mean anything.
This is nonsense words.
Let me show you a little collage of what extended grapheme clusters actually are.
Here you go.
As you can see, there are a bunch of different things on the screen right now, and each one
is an extended grapheme cluster.
So the capital letter E and the ñ and the farmer emoji and the whale emoji and the
dollar sign and the Euro symbol and the percent sign and a number 8, all of these are
extended grapheme clusters.
These are probably what you and I would call a "character".
So what does length count?
Does it count extended grapheme clusters?
Well, there's 1 extended grapheme cluster in the farmer emoji.
And so if it did, the length would be 1, but the length is 7.
So it doesn't count grapheme clusters.
I'll pause for questions here in the real presentation, but because this is a recording,
feel free to send me your questions anytime.
The next term we're going to learn is scalar values.
So back to the glossary, it is, "Any Unicode code point except high surrogate and
low surrogate code points.
In other words, the ranges of integers zero to D7FF16 to E00016 to 10FFFF16 inclusive".
Again, this is a bunch of nonsense.
What does this really mean?
A scalar value is just a number.
It's an integer between 0 and about 1.1 million.
Many of them are unused; reserved for future use, for example.
And really, it's just a number.
Most extended grapheme clusters contain one scalar.
So for example, the capital letter J in English corresponds to scalar value 74.
The music note character corresponds to 9836.
The cherry blossom emoji corresponds to 127,800.
These are just numbers I looked up, I don't have these memorized.
By the way, I'm not going to do this the rest of this presentation, but scalars are usually
written with a "U+" prefix and the numbers are written in hex, not decimal, but they
represent the same thing.
So for example, the music note I wrote as 9836, which is the way you would represent
it as a decimal number.
But the sort of more standard way to do it is "U+266C", which is the same number
encoded in hexadecimal.
But again, these represent the same value.
Some extended grapheme clusters contain many scalars.
So all the ones we've seen have had a one-to-one mapping, but for example, the farmer emoji
has a one-to-four mapping.
So there's a single extended grapheme cluster that is made up of 4 scalars.
I'm not going to read these numbers out, but 128,105, 127,998, and so on.
So there are 4 scalars that make up this extended grapheme cluster.
So back to our original question, what does length count?
Well, we know it doesn't count grapheme clusters because if it did, the length would be 1.
Does it count scalars?
Well, if it did, the length would be 4 and the actual length is 7.
So it doesn't count scalars either.
Again, send me any questions that you have.
The final term we're going to learn is UTF-16.
So how do you store these scalars in the computer?
You could imagine...you might have heard of UTF-8.
You could imagine defining your own way of doing it.
Maybe you use a JSON array or something like that.
JavaScript uses UTF-16.
UTF-16 is a popular character encoding, probably a little less popular than UTF-8 nowadays,
but it's still a very popular way to do things.
And as far as I understand, was the state of the art at the time that JavaScript was made.
So our final reading of the glossary:
UTF-16 is: "the Unicode encoding form that assigns each Unicode scalar value in the ranges U+0000..U+D7FF
and U+E000..U+FFFF to a single unsigned 16-bit code unit with
the same numeric value as the Unicode scalar value,
and that assigns each Unicode scalar value in the range U+10000..U+10FFFF to a surrogate
pair according to Table 3-5, 'UTF-16 Bit Distribution.'"
As you might expect, this is again something from the glossary that doesn't really make
a lot of sense to me.
UTF-16 takes these scalars and it splits them up into units.
Each unit is 16 bits large and it's an unsigned integer, so that means that it can go from
0 to about 66,000.
Many scalars fit into a 16-bit unit.
So for example, capital letter J is represented by scalar value 74.
That's not a very big number, so we only need one UTF-16 unit to store that.
The music note is represented by scalar value 9836.
Again, not too big to fit in a single unit, so we only use one.
Some scalars, however, are too big and they get split into two.
This is sometimes called a surrogate pair, where each unit by itself doesn't really mean much.
Put together, however, they make up a single scalar.
So for example, the cherry blossom emoji is represented by scalar value 127,800.
And that is too big to fit in a single unit, so it gets split into two.
I'm not going to talk about the algorithm that splits these up.
It's not simply dividing the number in half, but it's not super complicated and you can look it up.
(It's not too scary.)
The farmer emoji is made up of 4 scalars, as we've seen, and each of these scalars is
put into one unit or two units.
So for example, the first scalar is 128,105.
That's a big number, it gets split up into two units.
The next is 127,998.
That is also a big value, it gets split into two units, making our total 4.
The next is 8,205.
That's not too big, so we only need one unit for that.
And then the final scalar is 127,806.
Again, a big number that requires two units, and that means that we have a total of 7 UTF-16 units here.
So what does length count?
It doesn't count extended grapheme clusters, because there's only 1.
It doesn't count scalars, because there are 4, but it does count UTF-16 units.
And that is why the length of the farmer emoji is 7, because there are 7 UTF-16 code units in there.
Now it's time for a little bit of advice from me.
There are bugs here, waiting to happen.
One example is a character limit.
You might have an input where you can type characters, and you can maybe only type up
to 100.
So you've typed "Hello", space, and now you're about to type a farmer emoji.
I think if you do that, the user would expect the number of characters here to be 7.
In reality, if you use length naïvely, the length would jump up to 13.
It's possible that this is what you intended, but more likely this is going to be confusing
to the user, which is why services like Mastodon that have limits have more intelligent ways
of computing this beyond just simply calling .length on strings.
So this is something to be careful of.
Another is syncing with a backend.
This is a bit of a contrived example, comparing a JavaScript validation function to a Python
validation function.
And you could imagine you do some client-side validation, then you send it up
to the server, which does its own validation.
But because lengths are computed differently in different environments, you might have bugs.
So in JavaScript, the length of the farmer emoji is 7, as we've seen.
That means that if the limit is 20, the length of 20 units, you could only have two farmer
emojis be valid.
If you're sending it up to your Python backend, the length of the farmer emoji in Python is
confusingly 4, which means that you could only have four...or you could have a different
number—
you could have four farmer emojis in a string.
You could also imagine a database that has a different character encoding than JavaScript
or a different encoding than Python, and you could run into bugs when dealing with strings
in different encodings and having different limits or other kinds of validations.
Another is getting a character out of a string.
So I've written some code that capitalizes the first letter of a string, and if you are
lucky and the first character is not too big, basically, if it's not more than one UTF-16
unit, or if it's not more than one scalar value, then you're okay.
But there are cases where that isn't the case, like many emoji, and in those situations,
you are going to get garbage out when you try to get a character out.
Most of JavaScript uses UTF-16 code units.
So this is a big list I made.
We've seen that length uses UTF-16.
indexOf() will give you the index, the UTF-16 index, not a scalar index or an extended grapheme
cluster index.
slice(): you can slice in the middle of the farmer emoji and have all kinds of problems,
and there are various other ways
that things can go right and wrong, but know that you're using UTF-16 most of the time
you use JavaScript strings.
There are a few cases where that isn't true.
Iterating, so if you use for (character of string), or if you use the ... splat
operator, you'll get scalars out
(technically, you'll get the string corresponding thing for the scalar), and you can see here
that the farmer emoji is made up of things that kind of look like parts of it.
So there's the woman emoji, then there's the skin tone modifier, an invisible character
called the "zero width joiner" that I've represented as a square here, and the stalk of rice.
And when all of those are put together, the renderer will render the farmer emoji.
If you want to get extended grapheme clusters, it's a little bit of a messier story.
Intl.Segmenter() is something that you might be able to get away with in some environments.
For example, I was using Electron and I could get away with it because it's supported by
Chromium, but as of right now, it's not supported by Firefox, and so you may not be able to
use it directly.
There are some polyfills, my understanding is that those can get quite large, but maybe
worth evaluating.
You can also evaluate libraries like graphemer, I've also seen, it's called stringz, various
libraries that can also do a good job here if you want to deal with extended grapheme clusters.
I'll also say that this is not just a JavaScript problem, so I mentioned that in Python, the
length of the farmer emoji is 4, which is maybe better, but it's still confusing,
and most programming languages I have worked with have various caveats when you're trying
to get the length of a string.
Maybe they store their stuff in UTF-8, which has its own way of storing scalars.
Maybe it does extended grapheme clusters, which is maybe more intuitive, but then it
can be a little slow for larger strings because it has to iterate over every single byte in the string.
So there are various caveats you need to think about when you're dealing with strings in JavaScript and beyond.
So in summary, we learned about extended grapheme clusters, which is probably what you and I would
call a character. We learned about scalar values, which are numbers that back these grapheme clusters.
And we learned about UTF-16, which is how JavaScript stores these scalars.
We learned that most of JavaScript, including length, uses UTF-16 units. And there are probably
bugs here to watch out for.
Thank you very much for listening/watching. Feel free to reach any
time. The slides and more information about this talk are at evanhahn.com/chicagojs2023.